---
name: Gene Edward
surname: Veith
title: "“Brittle Crazy Glass”: George Herbert, Vocation, and the Two Priesthoods"
authordescription: 
tags: ["criticism"]
permalink: "/4/1/brittle-crazy-glass/"
---
George Herbert, in many ways, embodies what Charles Porterfield Krauth
calls the "conservative Reformation;" that is, the Reformation
understanding of grace, faith, and the Bible expressed by means of the
historic liturgy and a high view of the sacraments. But in Herbert's
day, the conservative Reformation---which Krauth identifies with Luther
and with early Anglicans---was already giving way in England to the more
radical Reformation of Calvin, Zwingli, and the Separatists.[^1] An
important part of this theological shift was a change in the doctrine of
vocation. Herbert struggled greatly to find his vocation, with his
aristocratic ambitions for public service eventually giving way to
pastoral ministry.[^2] Herbert threw himself into this divine calling,
however, recording his zeal and his regard for that office in his
character book *The Country Parson*. Herbert also labored to understand
his vocation as a poet, as various scholars have shown.[^3] In his
poetry, some of which apparently predates the three years he spent in
the pastoral ministry before his death, Herbert struggles with his
different callings. However, he also achieves resolution when he
realizes that his vocation---both as a priest and as a member of the
priesthood of all believers---is, in Luther's terms, a mask of God.

Luther's doctrine of vocation was, arguably, one of his most important
contributions to Christian spirituality.[^4] It was quite different,
however, from that of Calvin. Luther thought of vocation primarily in
terms of God's action: God gives us our daily bread, as we pray in the
Lord's Prayer, through the vocation of the farmer. He creates new human
beings through the vocation of mothers and fathers. God protects us
through magistrates. Christ baptizes, distributes His Body and Blood,
and proclaims His Word by means of pastors. God milks the cows, said
Luther, through the hands of the milkmaid. Luther called vocation *larva
dei*, the mask of God.

Each Christian, therefore, is a mask of God in his or her various
callings in the three estates of the family, the church, and the state.
Christians also may have a calling in the workplace, which Luther
deemphasized by classifying it under the family as the way the household
(*oeconomia*) made a living.

The major difference between Luther and Calvin is in the former's
theology of Christ's presence. Luther's insistence on the Real Presence
of Christ in the bread and wine of Holy Communion is the best known
example, but he also believed that God is really present in vocation. In
the sacramental controversies, Zwingli and Calvin had to argue that
Christ has ascended into Heaven and so is no longer present on earth in
His body, effectively removing Him not only from the sacrament but from
vocation.

For Luther and his followers in the conservative Reformation, vocation
was, on one level, a manifestation of how God works in governing the
secular world, the emphasis falling on God's action rather than that of
the human being. For Calvin, vocation is more a matter of law, of what
is demanded of the Christian, so that his followers talk about the
doctrine in terms of human obligation. Calvinists also tend to talk
about vocation in terms of serving God, which Luther resisted. Our
relationship to God, he said, does not depend upon our works, including
the works of our callings; but only on the work of Christ on the Cross
on our behalf. God does not need our good works, said Luther, but our
neighbor does. The purpose of every vocation is not so much to love and
serve God but to love and serve our neighbor---one's spouse in the
calling of marriage, one's children in the calling of parenthood, one's
employer and customers in the workplace, one's fellow members in the
church and fellow citizens in the state. Although, according to Christ's
account of the sheep and the goats---in which He says, "Inasmuch as ye
have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me"
(Matthew 25:40)---He turns out to be really present in the neighbor as
well.

The Calvinist version, though, was all about strenuous effort to show
oneself approved before God. Christina Malcolmson, in her book on
Herbert, after quoting numerous of his contemporaries on the subject,
shows that the doctrine of vocation displaced spirituality away from
even private meditation into the workplace, in effect, displacing
monastic asceticism into the secular arena. After illustrating the way
17<sup>th</sup> century Calvinists felt they had to work so arduously in the
marketplace to prove their election, she cites Max Weber, who
credits---or blames---the doctrine of vocation for the rise of
capitalism, "Now every Christian had to be a monk all of his life."[^5]
Luther, who insisted that he and Zwingli had "a different spirit," would
have considered this new secular monasticism to be just as legalistic
and grace-denying as the old.

Herbert's *The Country Parson* is a treatise on vocation. Though its
subject, in the words of the subtitle, is the "character" and the "rule
of holy life" of the rural pastor, it also discusses the doctrine of
vocation as it relates to his parishioners. In the chapter "The Parson
Surveys," he says how the parish priest "represents to everybody the
necessity of a vocation," covering the various estates of the family and
the commonwealth, in addition to the workplace.[^6] In one of the most
moving passages in the book, he recognizes the presence of Christ in the
neighbor, even the lowliest:

> Nothing is little in God's service: if it once have the honour of that
> Name it grows great instantly. Wherefore neither disdaineth he to
> enter into the poorest cottage, though he even creep into it and
> though it smell never so loathsomely. For both God is there also and
> those for whom God died.[^7]

Throughout *The Country Parson*, Herbert exemplifies a remarkable
sensitivity to his parishioners and their needs, and an earnest concern
to give his flock true pastoral care.

And yet, though he believes in the theology of God's presence in his
parishioners, he speaks of his own vocation as a pastor in very
different terms. The book begins, "A pastor is the Deputy of Christ for
the reducing of man to the obedience of God."[^8] Luther would agree
about the pastor being Christ's "deputy," though he would emphasize that
his calling is to proclaim the Gospel of Christ's forgiveness, rather
than coercing "obedience." But notice the implications that Herbert
draws:

> Out of this charter of the priesthood may be plainly gathered both the
> dignity thereof, and the duty: the dignity, in that a priest may do
> that which Christ did, and by his authority, and as his viceregent;
> the duty, in that a priest is to do that which Christ did, and after
> his manner, both for doctrine and life.[^9]

Here the pastor shares Christ's dignity and authority, and he has the
duty to do what Christ did and in the way that He did it. But missing is
the presence of Christ in his vocation. Without that, the standards the
pastor sets for himself---"to do that which Christ did, and after his
manner, both for doctrine and life"---are impossibly high.

Indeed, the life of the *Country Parson*, as Herbert describes it, is
austere and ascetic in the extreme. "The country parson is generally
sad," he says, "because he knows nothing but the Cross of Christ."[^10]
He knows "he must be despised."[^11] On fast-days he ensures that he not
only eats little but that the "quality" is "unpleasant."[^12] Herbert
and his wife were childless, but he urges parsons in finding callings
for their children not to let their sons be tavern keepers or their
daughters be lace-makers.[^13]

All the while, he piles up more and more responsibilities onto the
pastoral office. "The country parson desires to be all to his parish,
and not only a pastor, but a lawyer also and a physician."[^14] So he
reads law books and medical treatises, settling his people's disputes
like a Justice of the Peace and tending to their physical ailments. "The
country parson is not only a father to his flock," Herbert writes, but
carries "it about with him as fully as if he had begot his whole
parish."[^15] As if his own vocation were not arduous enough, Herbert
feels constrained to take upon himself everyone else's vocations.

No wonder, in the privacy of his own poetry, Herbert often chafes
against his own high standards for himself. Most notably, in "The
Collar," he strikes the board and cries, "No more," (l.1) calling in his
death's head, leaving his "cold dispute of what is fit and not," (l.20)
and raving against the demands and poses of his pastoral office. But
then, in the course of this extraordinarily honest artifice of
meditation, His Lord breaks in, "calling" him, as the poem says, with
the word of love, grace, and the gospel: "Child" (l.35), at which point
both the emotions and the poetic form are resolved. What this poem
dramatizes is a pastor encountering the Lord's real presence in his
vocation. The frustrations and restrictions---the sense in which the
speaker feels his "calling" to be a "collar"---are reexperienced in the
presence, mediated in His Word, of the "Caller."[^16]

In "The Windows," Herbert works out with theological precision how the
Lord is present in and works through the pastoral vocation and also why
the human being who holds that office is likely to experience conflicts
with that divine presence. The preacher is described as a window, a
transparent or at least translucent medium through which the light of
God's grace shines to illumine his people. But the preacher is "a
brittle crazy glass" (l.2). What must happen for God's Word to shine
through is for Christ to "anneal in glass thy story / Making thy life to
shine within the holy preacher's" (ll.6-8). God's Word manifests itself
through the preacher's sermon just as a story from the life of Christ
manifests itself in a stained-glass window. The preacher himself,
though, is brittle, cracked glass, but he has been colored and inscribed
with Christ. The preacher should accord himself with Christ who is in
him, but this is not a moralistic attempt to imitate the virtues of
Jesus. Rather, it is a matter of Christ's work---the poem has *Christ*
doing the annealing, *Christ* making His life to shine within the
preacher's---which is the language of justification by faith.

According to Luther's doctrine of vocation, God is hidden in vocation,
which is a way of speaking of His presence, just as a child hiding in
the room is present, though not seen. Luther stresses that the Christian
in vocation is often in conflict with that presence, wanting to be
served rather than to serve, acting for the self rather than for the
neighbor, ascribing saving merit to one's work rather than trusting in
God's grace alone. Such conflicts run throughout *The Temple*.

In "Aaron," we see the human priest comparing himself unfavorably to
what a priest should be, until his vocation is wholly filled, inhabited,
and covered by the presence of Christ. The repeated rhyme words in each
stanza, which establish the point-by-point comparison, are telling,
especially the changes Herbert brings to the word "rest." The priest is
to lead his people "unto life and rest" (l.4). Hell is a place "where is
no rest" (l.9). Without Christ, "I could have no rest" (l.14). In
Christ, to the "old man" of sin "I may rest" (l.19). Each of these
references is to the "rest" of the Gospel, to the Reformation notion
that salvation entails *not* working, but rather abiding securely and
peacefully in the grace of God. The final stanza applies the concept to
vocation: In his exercise of the priesthood, his ability to do so does
not lie in his own merits, of which he has none, only "profaneness,"
"defects," and "darkness" (ll. 6-7). Rather, he can be a priest because
Christ "lives in me while I do rest" (l. 24). The Calvinist sense of
vocation emphasized the necessity of "busy-ness," as Herbert does too
sometimes, as in "Employment" (2) when he envies the orange tree, that
"busy plant" (l. 22) or in "The Country Parson" when he commends his
parishioners who are "busy in the works of their calling."[^17] But for
Luther, one must *rest* in vocation, trusting in the hidden God to work
in and through the calling, as the person who is called subjugates the
sinful tendencies of the self through love and service to the neighbor.

Vocation was part of the Reformation doctrine of the priesthood of all
believers. This by no means meant, at least for the conservative
Reformation, that pastors were not necessary or that everyone was a
pastor. Rather, it meant that one did not have to be a pastor to be a
priest. As Richard Striers observes, speaking of "Aaron," "the
conditions for being a 'true priest' \[are\] basically identical with
those for being a true Christian."[^18] Thus, in his poem that most
explicitly treats vocation, "The Elixir," Herbert uses the same imagery
of glass that he uses to describe the pastoral office in "The Windows"
to describe a servant girl sweeping the floor: "A man that looks on
glass, / On it may stay his eye; / Or if he pleaseth, through it pass, /
And then the heav'n espy" (ll. 9-12). Recalling Luther's example of the
milkmaid as a mask of God, Herbert says that while our eyes might stop
on the surface of the servant, if we look deeper, we can see God shining
through her. She partakes of God, who "doth touch and own" her (l.23),
so that her "drudgery" is "divine" (l.18).

God is present in all vocations, including that of the poet. For all
that Herbert sometimes struggles with his poetic calling, as Tim
McKenzie has shown, Herbert at many points "claims that Christ
intervenes directly into the process of poetic composition."[^19]

All believers are priests because they mediate Christ's presence. In
addition, priests offer sacrifices. While Roman Catholicism teaches that
in the mass the priest reenacts an unbloody sacrifice, the Reformers all
taught that Christ on the cross offered the one sacrifice for the sins
of the world. But the New Testament speaks of other kinds of sacrifice,
which take place in each Christian's multiple vocations. St. Paul said
to "present your bodies a living sacrifice," which is accomplished in
hard labor, self-denial, and suffering (Romans 12:1). But another kind
of sacrifice is praise: "Through him then let us continually offer up a
sacrifice of praise to God" (Hebrews 13:5). This work of the priesthood
was to take place in vocation. Writes Herbert in "Providence," "Man is
the world's high Priest: he doth present / The sacrifice for all" (ll.
13-14), which consists of praising and lauding God (l. 17).[^20] In "The
Altar," which is a place of sacrifice, what Herbert offers up is praise:
"Wherefore each part / Of my hard heart / Meets in this frame, / To
praise thy name: / That if I chance to hold my peace, / These stones to
praise thee may not cease" (ll. 9-14).

The lines speak of poetry and serve as the dedication to the entire
poetic sequence of *The Church.* Priests in the church also belong to
this priesthood of all believers. George Herbert is thus exercising this
second priesthood in his vocation as a poet.

[^1]: Charles Porterfield Krauth, *The Conservative Reformation and Its
    Theology* \[1871\] (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 2007),
    xli-xliii.

[^2]: Contemporary scholarship casts doubt on Walton's assumption that
    Herbert turned away from worldly concerns to the priesthood in a
    sort of pious conversion. Christina Malcolmson, in *Heart-Work*:
    *George Herbert and the Protestant Ethic* (Stanford, CA: Stanford
    University Press, 1999) traces the fortunes of Herbert and his
    family as their kinsman, the Earl of Pembroke, fell in and out of
    favor.

[^3]: See Robert Shaw, *The Call of God: The Theme of Vocation in the
    Poetry of Donne and Herbert* (Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications,
    1981); Diana Benet, *Secretary of Praise: The Poetic Vocation of
    George Herbert* (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 1984);
    and Tim McKenzie, *Vocation in the Poetry of the Priest-Poets George
    Herbert, Gerard Manley Hopkins, and R. S. Thomas* (Lewiston, NY: The
    Edwin Mellen Press, 2003).

[^4]: See Gustaf Wingren, *Luther on Vocation*, trans. Carl S. Rasmussen
    (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2004). See also my own study of vocation
    in *God at Work: Your Christian Vocation in All of Life* (Downers
    Grove: Crossway Books, 2002).

[^5]: Malcolmson, p. 39. Weber himself was quoting Sebastian Franck.
    Malcolmson documents this Calvinist understanding of vocation.

[^6]: "A Priest to the Temple, or, The Country Parson: His Character and
    Rule of Holy Life," in *George Herbert: The Complete English Poems*,
    ed. John Tobin (New York: Penguin Books, 2004), p. 248.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 224.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 201.

[^9]: Ibid., 202.

[^10]: Ibid., 241.

[^11]: Ibid., 242.

[^12]: Ibid., 218.

[^13]: Ibid., 215.

[^14]: Ibid., 234.

[^15]: Ibid., 225.

[^16]: Quotations from Herbert's poetry are taken from *George Herbert:
    The Complete English Poems*, ed. John Tobin. See also Shaw, who says
    that "Herbert's concept of vocation is fundamentally sacramental"
    and is "rendered acceptable by the transforming presence of God" (p.
    90).

[^17]: "Country Parson," p. 223. Benet, p. 104, identifies a dispersed
    "vocation sequence" of 23 poems in which these different treatments
    are evident.

[^18]: Richard Strier, *Love Known: Theology and Experience in George
    Herbert's Poetry* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p.
    127. See McKenzie, p. 77, and his reading of this poem.

[^19]: McKenzie, p. 208. See also Diana Benet on Herbert's sense of
    poetry as a vocation.

[^20]: See McKenzie, p. 12, and Benet, pp. 175-176.
